My name is Jolene Head.
I am a member of the Opaskwayak Cree Nation in Northern Manitoba.
I've been a public servant for over 20 years, starting in the Winnipeg Office of Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada, where I spent the bulk of my career.
And I've just recently moved to the Acquisitions Branch to lead the Indigenous Procurement Policy Directorate.
In terms of my thesis, my thesis title is Deconstructing Colonial Practices in the Federal Public Service and where I got the idea for my thesis?
The topic came from my interest in leadership theory, which is the basis of the master's program
that I participated in, and as well for my involvement in reconciliation as an indigenous public servant.
But I think more importantly is the personal connection to reconciliation as a Cree woman.
And my decision was also based on my personal observations and reflections
that there was and is something not quite right about the public services approach to reconciliation.
I think it is important to decolonize before reconciliation because based on the research, both from the literature and information shared by Niwâkomâkanak,
it indicates that reconciliation cannot occur in the absence of addressing the systemic barriers that exist in the public service.
The public service system and culture are colonial constructs which have created legislation and policies that have caused irreparable damage
to First Nation, Métis and Inuit Peoples in taking steps to decolonize as much of the system and culture as we can.
Recognizes and acknowledges the truth of not only the historical impacts they have had on First Nation, Métis and Inuit,
but also the truth about how it perpetuates ongoing colonization against Indigenous Peoples.
It's for this reason that I argue that decolonization is an essential process, that reconciliation needs to support and not the other way around.
Reconciliation cannot occur without decolonization efforts.
Anything less ignores the systemic barriers that continue to exist and turns a blind eye to the culture that maintains those systemic barriers.
So in my opinion, the biggest, the two biggest obstacles are the public service system itself and the culture and people that maintain that system.
It's a massive system, and it's overwhelming to think about changing it in a substantial way.
However, the research clearly points to the need to do just that if we want to tackle complex problems effectively.
Public servants are part of that system and the current culture maintains the status quo.
So we are also, we also need to change the culture moving towards one that is committed to challenging the status quo,
to becoming a truly inclusive culture, and to deconstructing colonial practices to make Canada equitable
in its treatment of minoritized populations like Indigenous Peoples.
And what I'm currently seeing is a grassroots movement by public servants who are demanding these changes.
And what we need now is true commitment and action, which includes dedicating time and resources by senior leadership.
Senior leadership points to EDI (Equity, Diversity and Inclusion) , anti-racism and the Many Voices One Mind as evidence of progress.
However, some of these initiatives are flawed, and in many ways
are actually maintaining the status quo because they are not truly addressing the systemic issues inherent in the system.
So the actions may actually be perceived as performative.
I think embracing discomfort, particularly in the context of work around social justice issues such as reconciliation,
it means growth.
It means self-reflection.
It signals a need for changing one's thoughts, biases and behaviors.
I think it is the place for growth and learning.
And this is the place where change happens.
It is for this reason, as a public service, we need to become comfortable with being uncomfortable.
It provides the space to have these uncomfortable but essential and real discussions on topics such as reconciliation,
which I hope will then lead to action both at the systemic level as well as individual.
I was surprised and still am surprised by the interest in my thesis.
I honestly thought it would go the way many other reports,
inquiries and commissions have gone, shelved and ignored, gathering dust on a shelf somewhere.
It's overwhelming, to be honest, but I'm also extremely grateful and humbled by the interest.
It reinforces for me that the environment in the public service is looking for this kind of research, and I think that is why it is resonating with so many.
None of its groundbreaking.
It's all known.
However, it has been weaved together to tell a story about the public service and public service leadership
and the real change that is needed, not just needed, but real change is a must
if we truly want to succeed in the government's reconciliation efforts or any other complex problem public servants are charged with addressing.
And while the current organizational structure is still hierarchical in nature, executives have an essential role to play in this work.
So the question that remains is whether there is an appetite in actioning any of the recommendations,
particularly the recommendations that are system level changes rather than individual changes.
Individual changes are easier and can be actioned relatively quickly.
System level changes are much more difficult, take more time and require sustained commitment and momentum.
And that can be really difficult in the public service.
And I think that may be why we avoid or ignore those types of changes unless we are forced to address them.
Ekosi everybody, thank you for taking the time to listen and watch my video.
I really appreciate it.
And I really do hope for those that haven't had an opportunity to read my thesis that you are able to find the time to do so.